Okay, good. Thank you so much, Mark. My
name is Amanda Whitmire. I am from the
Miller Marine Biology Library here at
Stanford Libraries, and I'm going to spend
the next 10 minutes talking about student
work and FERPA. And I nixed copyright
because I only have 10 minutes, and
there's a copyright person coming up in a
bit later, so we won't worry about that
for now. So FERPA is U.S. law, but I'm
discussing it through the lens of a
librarian at a marine research station
with the intent of really just putting it
on our collective radar as we move forward
talking about archives and access over the
next couple days. And just for context, my
library is actually located at the Hopkins
Marine Station, which is about 90 miles
south of here, perched on the southern tip
of Monterey Bay. Lucky me. So let's just
get right into it. What is FERPA? So FERPA
is a federal law that came in response
really to a history of inconsistent
institutional policies and improper
disclosure of student information. So the
intent of FERPA really is to protect
privacy of both parents and student
information.
And what FERPA says is that institutions
that receive federal funds have to provide
parents with access to the educational
records of their children, although this
right transfers to the student once they
turn 18. It prohibits releasing the
educational records of students other than
directory information without written
consent, although consent is not required
for release of the education records to
certain institutions and organizations,
which is slightly confusing, right? So
recall that I mentioned that directory
information can be released without
consent. So what is directory information?
It's things that wouldn't be considered a
violation of the student's privacy, which
surprisingly includes things like place
and date of birth, their photograph. If
they're on an athletic team, you can
release their height and weight. So I'll
leave it to you to decide how invasive you
think this non-private information really
is. And then recall also that consent
wasn't required to release certain
education records of students. Well, what
are those? FERPA defines those as being
student works that are directly related to
the students process through school and
they're maintained by the educational
institution and it could be handwritten
assignments, digital media, and so on.
Lots of different formats. So already this
is pretty confusing and as librarians and
archivists you're probably wondering well
what is the overlap between student work
you might have in your collection and
FERPA? What is considered an education
record and might have to be collected and
what is something that we can make
available. And so ALA actually asked the
US Department of Education this question
in 1993 and the Department of Ed clarified
saying something like a thesis which a
student gives to the library generally for
the known purpose of being made available
as a research material. The process of the
student giving their material to the
library provides a form of tacit
permission to to make those materials
available as research objects.
So as we've seen, the regulations
concerning student work or educational
records can be confusing, but FERPA is
important, and our understanding of FERPA
is important because I think students
produce really important research that's
critical to our understanding of the
world. And to the extent possible, I wanna
be able to make those research materials
available. And so for the next few
minutes, I'm going to give you an example
of something that I've been navigating
through my work recently to give you some
context on my thoughts on this issue. And
it's going to seem like a little bit of a
tangent at first, but stick with me. It's
all going to come back together. So has
anyone in this room ever used the Merlin
Bird ID app or iNaturalist to identify
something? Yes. My people. You're my
people. Perfect. So when you take a
picture of something and you upload it
into Merlin or to iNaturalist, what you're
doing is you're collecting three pieces of
information. I saw this thing in this
place at this time. And those three pieces
of information together are called a
species occurrence.
And there's a place called GBIF, the
Global Biodiversity Information Facility,
that gathers species occurrence records
from iNaturalist, from eBird, from
academic research that's happening all
over the world. And as it stands, they
have almost 1.4 billion records of, I saw
this thing in this place at this time. And
why is that important? Well, if you're
interested in understanding things like
how climate change might be shifting the
distribution of animals and plants on the
planet, you have to understand not only
where they are now, but where they were
before. And that is the power of 1.4
billion observations in GBIF. So as one
example, say you're interested in knowing
where this very common marine anemone can
be found in the world, Anthoplaura, and
you go to GBIF and you take a look and see
what they have, you'll see that there's
almost 2,500 species occurrence records,
which sounds like a lot of data. But if
you take one step deeper into the data,
what you find is that the large majority
of our records of this organism, and in
fact the majority of all of the records in
GBIF, are very recent. And if you're
interested in looking at things on the
scale of climate change, you need to be
able to look much further back in time. So
how do we fill this observational gap? And
that's where I think long-standing
educational institutions like Stanford and
others really are poised to make a
significant contribution. And one area
where I think we can make a contribution
locally is through the undergraduate work
of our students. So in particular I just
want to give this one example of two
students, Sarah Gilman and Rafe Stagrin.
They came to Hopkins in the summer of 1993
and what they chose to do for their
research project was to resample a
transect that was first sampled in 1931 to
1933. So there's an an intertidal line
that goes from the shore out 105 yards.
They finally found the line after three
days, started by that brass bolt. They
looked at 19 square yards along this line.
They counted up all the species and they
compared what they saw to what another
researcher had seen back in the 1930s. And
what they discovered was that there was a
shift toward warmer water species. And
along with a temperature time series that
we also maintain at Hopkins, they
hypothesized that this might be due to
shifting ocean temperatures. And their
student paper is in my library. So based
on that work, they came back the following
summer. They did more work. They
identified over 58,000 individuals from
105 different invertebrate taxa. And
again, they were able to, with this
greater body of data, actually show a
strong correlation between species shifts
and changing ocean temperatures. And their
work as undergraduates was published in
Science. Not bad. But their work is just
one paper in a much larger collection that
we have in our library that expands from
every year a class was the same class was
taught from 1963 to 2011 and these are all
of their unbound papers which are now
actually here on campus being digitized.
But what you'll also find out is that my
collection of student papers is not
unique. So these are similar collections
in Washington up at Friday Harbor,
collection starts in the 40s, up at Bodega
Marine Labs just north of us here, their
collection starts in the 1920s and is on
both of these are ongoing. Here's a
collection from Banfield Marine Science
Center up in Canada, British Columbia. And
when I reached out to my colleagues at
other marine stations, what I found is
there are literally thousands of
undergraduate student research papers
available for local use in our libraries.
So if you're interested in exploring
something like climate change for an
intertidal species, this body of work is
unprecedented in its coverage in space and
time. But what does this have to do with
FERPA? You're all wondering, Amanda. And
so what I discovered when I was working
with my colleagues up and down the coast
to assess the potential for creating just
a federated catalog, let's get all the
bibliographies of all these students
papers together, put them in one place, so
if a researcher wanted to know just what's
out there in terms of student research,
can I find it? What I discovered is that
in at least two cases of those libraries
on the last slide, the librarians were
limited in their ability to share
bibliographies because of the
institution's understanding of FERPA. So
in the case in front of you here, the
librarian was told she had to remove all
of the student names, the student author
names from the papers from the
bibliography. This is our oldest
collection, it goes back to 1928, so she
had to remove all those names by hand. She
was also told she couldn't put these in
the library catalog, so what she did is
she created a PDF and she shares this on
the library webpage. And if you'd like to
search it, you can use a control F to
search her catalog of student papers. In
another case, a librarian was told point
blank, you can't put this bibliography
online, period. It's an invasion of
students' privacy. But you remember what
what the US Department of Education said.
When a student gives the work to the
library, it's tasked with permission to
share the work. I'm not talking about
copyright, that's a totally separate
issue, but it's perfectly acceptable to
make the work available through the
library. And their name is directory
information, that's not protected. So
there seems to be a lot of confusion about
FERPA that's really limiting our ability
as librarians to distribute content and
make it discoverable in ways that we think
are unacceptable. acceptable. So I hope
I've been able to show you that there's
potential that lies within student work
and the impact that you can have so that
you might understand my frustration and my
interest in FERPA. As a librarian, I feel
a moral obligation to make critical
observational research data and
information available to researchers to
the widest extent possible under the
growing threat of climate change, siloed
catalogs or worse yet catalogs that you
can't even find are completely
unacceptable as a status quo and I know I
don't need to tell you guys that. So we
need new ways to discover and access the
research hiding in our collections and in
the case of student works this means that
we have to understand the limits and the
latitudes associated with FERPA and that's
why I wanted to share it with you today.
Thank you.